Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
There are thousands of military jobs involved with fighting the war in Iraq, but Captain Mark White, A&M Class of 2003, had one of the more fascinating deployments as a member of Alpha Company 111th Engineer Battalion.
It had nothing to do with engineering, but everything to do with security for the constant flow of generals, presidents, senators, media, song and dance folks, and other assorted VIPs visiting the country.
The detail that goes into a seemingly simple visit to Iraq by a dignitary may surprise you, but it was his job to make sure that there were few, if any, surprises for the guest.
Please welcome Captain Mark White to Veterans of the Valley.
Fascinating job.
When you first went over there, did you realize that that's what you were gonna do, that that was gonna be your deployment, that you were gonna do that?
We knew about,
for sure about three months before we were going.
So then we started our preparation and we had several exercises and we spent three weeks at Fort Polk, Louisiana doing a mission rehearsal exercise and that's all we focused on.
The thing about it is that you train for it a certain way and then it's not really what you think it's going to be until you get there.
Right.
And so we had a about 10 day time period where we would
Watch at first.
We just watched the people that were taken over for and then they would watch us just make sure we're doing it right Right and a huge part of is this building contacts and learning routes and ways to go because you Spend so much time out throughout the country that you gotta know where you're going It doesn't surprise me that that's the way you're prepared for it because smooth running operation is exactly what you did that that was part of your job now you all were based Near Baghdad right outside the airport.
Is that right?
Yes, sir at the victory base compound
And now there was a hotel involved, which is sort of the main hotel.
Talk about that hotel and what it used to be and what it was used for.
The hotel was, you know, we used it to house the senior level dignitaries.
We had, I think, nine suites.
They're all nice, had marble, showers, flushing toilets, all the things that were really nice to have in Iraq.
Before that, prior to that, it was used as a
kind of a weekend brothel for Saddam and his fellow Baptist.
So I guess it's kind of a fascinating place, right?
It's pretty nice.
It had its own private dining room, a lakeside view.
Not the typical things you get in Iraq.
No, but your missions didn't really involve a whole lot there.
You were mainly out in the field.
Talk about what your job was.
Like I say, it's very fascinating.
And whenever a dignitary came to Iraq, that's when you went to work.
Exactly.
We would know, you know, sometimes weeks in advance, sometimes days in advance when someone was coming.
And from the point that they were approved to come to Iraq, we would get an itinerary and we'd flesh it out, make sure it would work, make sure it was functional.
and then execute it from the time that person landed in Iraq.
And it didn't necessarily have to be in Baghdad.
They could land down south in Najaf or up in Mosul.
We'd pick them up and meet them there, and we were responsible for their security, their logistics, their travel, everything that encompassed their time in Iraq was what was our responsibility.
Ultimately, we focused the most on security because that's what was paramount for our mission to be a success.
Right, right.
Who came?
Who were you in charge of?
What kind of people?
Name some titles and some people.
Who were they?
You know, it varied from low-level
in the full scheme of things, low-level staff, general officers from the Pentagon and the Joint Chiefs, all the way up to the Secretary of Defense, Donald Rumsfeld, the President of Poland.
The Koreans had a contingent there, so they would have, South Koreans, would have a lot of their senior military, all the military defense people from other countries that were part of the coalition.
And then, as well as...
The MWI, the morale welfare people like Toby Keith, Rascal Flats, Jessica Simpson, there's all kinds of people, and then dance teams, cheerleading teams, and then lots of senators and congressmen and women would come over.
Now, you were there from December to December, 2004 to 2005.
Yes, sir.
You were there for that year.
So you mentioned the senators.
I mean, some of the high-profile people that we've heard of, just about all of them came through because they wanted to be there, and it was good politically to say they'd been to Iraq, right?
Yes, sir.
There's a nice little stipulation that if you spend one day in a war zone, you get tax-free for that month.
Mm-hmm.
I don't want to say that was their agenda, but I'm sure it's not a bad thing because some would spend one day in Iraq.
But they would come and, you know, I kind of judge my impression of a senator on what their itinerary was.
If they just came and just talked to the Prime Minister and the Minister of Defense and Minister of the Interior of Iraq,
That's one thing.
But some guys, and it would take time to make sure that they met their delegates.
They would be sure that they had a breakfast with everyone that's in their district.
And so, you know, I was fortunate enough, you know, the representative from the Abilene area where, you know, it was based, he came and had a barbecue dinner with us.
Right.
And he just happened to be with Tom Osborne on that trip when Tom Osborne was a senator for...
for Nebraska.
So it was a neat, neat trip.
It was indeed.
Now the officers, they would be pretty much service bodyguards.
I mean, they would serve, they would stay close to the VIP and you as an officer, that would be your role?
Yes sir, exactly.
We would label ourselves the escort officer and then we'd have the PSD, the protective services detachment or detail.
And that would be the enlisted guys.
It would be the outer, the outer ring that would provide the security, you know,
a little distance out, whereas the escort officer or the officers, we have to be one, you know, no further than one door away.
We always make sure that we're right there, close enough that, you know, if it happened and if harm came in their way, we could grab them, snatch them, throw them in a truck and get out of there or get on the helicopter, whatever we needed to do to get away from the threat.
Tell you what, this is a story that can really, really best be told in pictures.
And Mark has quite a few photographs that he took from his year in Iraq.
And let's go to just a few of them right now.
We have several pictures.
Here's our first, get Mark to comment on each one.
That's the unit?
That's the company, yes, that's the Alpha Company.
And this is at Fort Hood prior to us getting our desert uniforms.
We spent three months at Fort Hood training, going over just basic combat skills, making sure everybody's refreshed, getting certified on our combat lifesaver skills.
And we actually had a detachment come down.
We worked on advanced driving skills, you know, how to pit a car and how to run someone off the road properly without hurting them.
Now, if I'm right, correct me if I'm wrong, I think that's you sitting right behind the flag, is that right?
That is, yes, that's me right there.
That's right, I recognized you right there in the front row.
Okay, let's move on.
This is me at the NATO compound.
You know, NATO had a role there to kind of set up the schools and help educate some of the people within the government there.
And so they had a nice compound, and the significance of this was this was one of the first times I saw grass.
in Iraq.
There's not a whole lot of it out there and so I was happy to see it.
It's like a country club setting.
It did.
It was real nice.
Yeah.
Muster.
We had a pretty good turnout if you think about the amount of civilians and military people in Iraq.
They also had another Muster downtown, Baghdad, but we had the largest one in the country.
Also of note in here is the current
Vice President of the Student Affairs for A&M, General Weber, when he was in Baghdad as the multinational forces Iraq chief of staff.
That's a great shot.
And that's the multinational forces Iraq headquarters on Victory Base.
This is kind of the view off our back porch at our office building and the hotel as well.
And a lot of our meetings would take place over at that building just because that's where some of the senior military leaders were at and where they needed to meet with.
Now, is this a building here that was, obviously, it used to be something else, or was it built specifically for the war?
It was one of Saddam's weekend getaways, one of those little palaces.
On the other side of that, you can't see it, but there's two bridges that go out to it, and the coalition blew up those bridges when they came in, and then they said, we met lots of people that came in that were on that initial invasion, talked about how much money was just in that building alone, and they had to take truckloads of it out, because that's where Saddam was stashing some of the stuff.
Well, I'm glad he built such nice office buildings.
This is a beautiful Iraq at sunset, right?
Yes, sir.
Yeah, just, you know, something to add that, you know, maybe a war-torn country, but it certainly has its beautiful moments.
This is on the other side of the lake from the front view of our office, and that's one of the intelligence buildings.
They had several other little compounds over by it.
That's a lookout tower of some sort, I guess.
Yes, sir.
Well, it's actually just a part of that.
It's kind of just scenic.
Yeah, that's great.
Okay.
Go ahead.
This is me.
I was an escort officer for Donald Rumsfeld.
I think it was April.
April 11th was when this trip was.
And this was right at the airfield where the helicopters took off, right next to the embassy.
We were right beside the embassy.
And he was right back there talking to General Casey, who was the force commander of Iraq at the time.
And they spent a lot of time together.
And I got the pleasure of being the escort officer for them.
That had to have been quite an honor, really.
It was.
It's a lot of work.
If you've ever wanted to put yourself in a helicopter over Iraq during wartime and looking down on Baghdad, this is what you see, right?
That's what you see.
This is just a little part of downtown Baghdad, flying over it.
You can see how close the houses are and how close the communities are.
Now you talked about some of the celebrities were there.
This is a sample.
Who are we looking at?
Yeah, Jessica Simpson and Nick Lachey and their tour manager.
I don't know his name.
Yeah, and their tour manager.
Tour manager looks like he wants to be somewhere else.
Yeah, most of them did.
That's right.
They're not married anymore, right?
No.
It looks like they were fighting right then.
Yes sir.
A lot of the celebrity types would go from base to base and fly them around and they would put on a show.
They'd have very aggressive, very busy schedules.
They'd be really tired at the end, but they were always very grateful for what you did.
We were thankful for them taking the time to come over and provide some entertainment.
Absolutely.
This is north up in the town of Mosul, which is close to Turkey.
There's grass up there, and it's green up there, and it's a lot milder temperature.
It's always pleasant to go up there, and this is right there.
We're waiting for our helicopters to come pick us up and take us back down to Baghdad outside of Mosul.
Okay.
This is a small village in Iraq?
Yes, sir.
Around the countryside, there's just these random villages.
They'll have one road going in, one road going out.
We'd fly over them throughout our trips around Iraq, and we'd throw out soccer balls or candy or something, because they're isolated villages, and the kids would just come storming out of the buildings whenever they heard the helicopters, and they'd wave and do something for them.
Wow.
We've got some more pictures.
Mark has brought a couple of things, and this is one of your armor jackets, is that right?
Yes, this is our body armor.
We'd wear pretty much everywhere, and it doesn't have the plates in it.
We had to turn the plates back in in Kuwait, so it's fairly heavy, but it provides sufficient protection from any kind of small caliber weapon unless you got shot in the face.
That's right.
Fortunately, you
You wore it, but you didn't need it, right?
Exactly.
That's good.
I was happy to have that.
That's a good thing.
A lot of the media, sometimes it would come over.
Would you be on a detail with some of the media also that would be over there?
I know you mentioned Peter Jennings, not long before he passed away was there.
you got to spend some time with him?
I did.
There was, especially around election time when there was, you know, the country is at such a volatile point and the success of those elections were determining, you know, where the country would move forward and there's such a big stake in the U.S.
interest in there.
All the media would be there, including, you know, Peter Jennings, who was
you know, we'd forgot about until we looked back later on that he'd, you know, he'd passed away, you know, I think.
Right, he was in August.
He had passed away, and I looked it up, he had passed away in August of that year, the year August of 2005.
Yes, sir.
He was real easygoing, real mild-tempered.
He liked to come talk to the guys, just talk to the lower enlisted and just talk about the day and whatnot.
Other people from the media talked to you a little bit about Geraldo being there.
Yeah, kind of a party guy.
Kind of a party guy, had a little stuff in the room.
It's nice enough to leave back for everyone else.
Right.
And then General McCaffrey, General Wayne Downing.
And then you'd see all the Fox News people would be over there.
You and McCaffrey got pretty tight, right?
We did.
Me and I got to know General Barry McCaffrey very well.
Spent 11 days straight with him.
And we went all over the country, everywhere.
Just me and him in our detail.
And I ended up keeping in touch with him later on.
He's a really good guy.
He's been so involved in the military and U.S.
government for so long.
He has so many stories, you know.
Right.
I just really enjoyed being around him and hearing Wally and say, and then it's neat to see how General Petraeus, General Vine, some of the senior leaders would look up to him so much and really cared about to hear what he had to say.
You know, he spent a lot of time with General Casey over at his house.
I want people to understand that when you got an itinerary for a VIP that was coming, you'd actually go through this itinerary twice because before they ever got there,
You would go where they were going to go just to check everything out, check security, and then you'd actually be on the mission, right?
Oh, yes.
I mean, it was imperative that we flushed out any kinks that could possibly arise and make sure that we had a contingency plan for the whole itinerary.
The day before, if possible, we would run through it start to finish, and then we'd have a big briefing, make sure that everybody knew exactly what the role was because there's so many
places within our wreck where you could get stopped.
There could be a hiccup or security you need to worry about.
And so we'd make sure we had everything covered and we were fortunate to not really have any issues throughout the whole year.
Right, right.
None that you could plan.
Now I know that there were weather problems, sandstorms and things like that that would mess up the original itinerary.
Yeah, we couldn't plan for the weather.
We would do our best, but if a sandstorm came in and it would make visibility zero, you'd have to have a hard time seeing your hand in front of your face.
Helicopters can't fly in that.
And it's also, it's a big time for insurgents to kind of put out their roadside bombs and things like that.
So it's not safe at that time.
And so we would try to have some kind of backup plan.
It depends upon where you're at.
Now sometimes you may just get stuck out in the middle of nowhere at a remote location and you're just gonna have to do... I felt bad because sometimes that local commander, that lieutenant colonel, will get stuck with this four-star general for three or four hours longer than he wanted.
He'd have a set plan for what he had to do and what he had to show.
Then he's just kind of stuck on the spot, not knowing what he's doing.
All right, well, you want to see the hallway.
Here's the hallway.
We saw the picture of you on the detail with Secretary Rumsfeld.
That was a little bit different than most.
I guess a lot of them came.
They had an itinerary.
They pretty much stuck to it.
But this guy was the boss.
I guess his plan changed hour to hour sometimes.
Oh, definitely.
We had started video teleconferences about three weeks in advance, at least, between me, the embassy, and back to the Department of Defense and his people.
And that is almost a daily thing, if I want to change this or change that.
And then a big thing for him was wanting to go see...
Mr. Barzani, who was the president of the Kurds, and he wanted to see him, and Barzani wanted to talk to Donald Rumsfeld as well, and Kurds have a big interest in the country.
But the big thing was deciding on where to meet at.
Mr. Rumsfeld, Secretary Rumsfeld, want to meet him down in Iraq and Baghdad, because that's where he was going to be at anyway for some
meetings of their Senate type place.
Mr. Barzani didn't want to see him there.
He wanted to see him at his private compound.
And then that just created a whole litany of issues because his compound is
seven hours north of Baghdad, in the hills, away from everything else, with no room to, Secretary of Rumsfeld, we had six helicopters, and another four Apache gunships flying around.
It's a pretty big deal.
And he has such a big entourage, and so he takes this little big compound, and this apocalypse now scene of all these helicopters coming in.
It was interesting nonetheless, but it came out fine.
They got to have their meeting, everything worked out, and we just flew Mr. Rumsfeld out of a different location than where initially planned.
Let's go to some more photographs right now that Captain Mark White has supplied to us here.
We'll go look at them here.
This is up in Kirkuk.
This is actually Jerry Patterson, who's the Veterans Land Board Commissioner of Texas, an Aggie grad, a Vietnam vet.
He actually came with the VFW when they had a contingency come.
And he was a proud Aggie, and we found another proud Aggie up in Kirkuk near the oil fields, and we all took a picture.
That's great, that's a great picture.
I know Jerry, he's a good man.
I really appreciate this time.
This is in Balad, this is where you see a lot of things about that main hospital, that's where it's at.
This is actually one of the Predator drones, which provides, it's an unmanned aerial vehicle that provides a lot of reconnaissance, a lot of intelligence, and you also notice a missile attached to it in case it needs to take care of something en route.
That's quite a weapon.
This is an outstanding photograph.
This is the landing pad up in Mosul.
There was only four spots, and that's where we parked the four helicopters.
And that's actually on a mountain, and it was always like going to Mosul.
It was always real nice and they had good food there, which is what I'd judge bases on, how their food was.
But you catch a lot of turbulence.
If you're on that last helicopter and you had to run down that line to get out of the flight line, you'd feel a lot of wind.
So it was always interesting.
So you'd gotten out of your chopper to take this picture, is that right?
I had, yes.
Yes, ma'am.
This is some of our company here, and right outside our little quarters on Victory Base, we'd make a lot of plaques to tell people, thank you, that helped us out over in the force headquarters or the core headquarters.
Good picture.
This is me re-enlisting.
He's a First Sergeant Leonard now, at the time he was in E6, but I was re-enlisting him into the Army for another six years.
It was kind of a pleasure for me, because I was enlisted before, and he was actually my squad leader while I was in Bosnia.
As a 19-year-old kid, he made me roll around in the dirt, roll around in the grass, and then here, six years later, I had the opportunity and the pleasure to re-enlist him in the Army, and he's been a great person to bounce things off of throughout the years.
Good picture.
Toby Keith concert?
Toby Keith, yes, sir.
He came down, put on a big show.
I think they actually cut to this during the CMA Awards, and he sang a song, and he did a full concert there for us at the Victory Base, and that was a big deal, as you can see.
Everybody wanted to come out there, and they wanted to
wanted to pile in and get as close as they could.
He put on a great show.
It was a nice thing to kind of get your mind off, you know, what's going on around you, just kind of for a minute, for 30 minutes, for an hour, whatever it was.
You get to just kind of relax and enjoy a little bit of country music and someone to appreciate.
He's got some great songs.
Now Mark, you know that there's veterans watching this show right now, World War II veterans, that are looking at this picture.
And they're thinking back to the time that they sat and watched Bob Hope entertain.
So this is the same thing.
Just fast forward and you've got other entertainers doing the same thing.
Yes, sir.
Yeah.
That's great.
Good picture.
Good one.
Here's me and a couple other Aggies, Casey Tutte and their fellows that both class of 99, class of 97.
There was a few of us, and we'd get together when we could, and share old A&M memories, talk about the game that week.
I used to get up at 3 in the morning to listen to Dave South on a radio broadcast.
I'd find a computer and get on the internet and listen, and these guys do the same.
This is over at their compound at Camp Slayer, which is right beside where I was at, another man-made lake.
All right.
You mentioned Dave, of course.
Mark and I both work on the...
the football broadcast.
We have a lot of fun doing that.
This was not your first deployment overseas when you were 19 years old.
You were in Bosnia.
Yes, sir.
Talk about briefly about that deployment.
At that time we'd start off with the same company actually, Alpha Company 111.
We were supposed to do an engineering mission to begin with.
We were going to help with demining operations, help the Bosnians go ahead and remove mines as part of their agreement to do with some of the conventions at the Dayton Accords.
And about a week into our mission rehearsal exercise, they said, no, you're going to do base defense.
So we're like, okay.
So I worked at the main gate, the vehicle gate there to get traffic in and out, which was
It was kind of interesting.
Lowly gate guy.
Working the gate, searching cars, searching people, taking their alcohol away.
Not a popular gate guy all the time.
Not a popular job, no.
But I learned a lot.
And it so happens I was selected soldier of the year, S-47, Task Force Eagle soldier of the year.
And that's ultimately led me to become an officer was after that time, a lot of officers came and talked to me and they're like, you know, you have some college hours.
maybe you should consider going to the officer field.
And that's only what I did.
But that was a great learning experience for me because four years later when I go to Iraq, I'd already had that going away from home moment.
It was sad at the time.
When I went back the second time, it was easier to kind of put my arm around the guys and keep their heads up when they were feeling down because I had a lot of young soldiers.
It was their first time away from home and going to a tumultuous area.
Right.
So that experience when you were young helped you when you were in Iraq, obviously.
Definitely.
You've been home for about three years now.
Yes, sir.
But you plan on a deployment going back sometime between next summer and the summer after that.
Is that right?
Yes, sir.
Talk about that.
You know, just the way the state of affairs are and the way the Texas Army National Guard is, your dwell time or your time at home usually is more than three or four years.
Currently, there's lots of soldiers from the state of Texas that are deploying to Iraq and Afghanistan.
As a company commander, I've given up my fair share of soldiers that have deployed in recent months, or will deploy this summer, and I'm in that same boat.
They need soldiers.
My take on it is I'm a single, or I don't have any kids, or I'm not married yet.
I'd better take their place.
That's such a burden and such a hard time on families to lose a loved one.
And so I'd like to do it now while I'm young, while I'm single and don't have any children, to take on that responsibility.
So I try to put my name in the pot.
Even if my name doesn't go in the pot, it will be put in there anyway by someone else for a brigade headquarters.
Right.
And your next deployment, you figure, will be somewhat safer.
Yes, it'll probably be as a staff officer working, you know, within a compound.
As we talked about, I went all over Iraq, from Masouda to Qrit, to Fallujah to Ramadi, all over the country.
I got to see it all.
Whereas this next appointment as a staff officer, I'll probably just be in one building, have a 12-hour shift, you know, day in, day out.
Very monotonous, but it still has its reason for being there.
Besides being on reserve duty now as National Guard duty,
Talk a little bit about that and also what you're doing.
You're teaching over at Texas A&M.
Yes, sir.
You know, I have my National Guard duty.
Actually, I have drill this weekend.
I'll drive up to Abilene early Saturday morning after the basketball game.
And we'll have, you know, we train for your wartime mission.
That's what we do on the weekends.
During the week, I'm a teacher, work over in the Kinesis department, teaching Kinesis 198s, 199s, health and fitness courses.
I have 11 courses.
Work Monday through Thursday, 8 to about 515, 530.
That takes up a lot of time, it's my full time, but the thing is I take a lot of stuff from the military and apply it to my job.
Make sure that, especially the physical fitness stuff, to give my students the best course they can have.
A lot of them kind of say that they're expecting to have a blow off course.
Some teachers just kind of let them come in and work out.
I put them through the grinder, I take them out and roll around on the grass a little bit.
Let them have a little fun and see what it's like.
Ultimately, at the end of the semester, they like it.
They're like, thanks for making me work.
They lose a lot of weight, get in shape, and it makes me feel good.
Mark, we have just about a minute, minute and a half left, and I don't want to drag you into getting too political on this, but I heard a story this morning, as a matter of fact, that in the month of November of 2008, there were seven American casualties in Iraq.
Those are tragic, certainly.
In November of 2007, there were nearly 30.
Something's working over there.
Definitely.
I think General Petraeus, who I had a lot of involvement with during our mission, he had a good plan.
I think it worked.
I think insurgent forces are kind of learning their lesson and backing off and I think they're starting to try to focus on other areas and I believe that General Petraeus, General Ordiano and Secretary Gates have a great plan and I think they're in the right direction, definitely.
Indeed.
Good luck to you and thank you very much for your service.
It's been a pleasure having you here.
It was just a fascinating job.
You got to be around a lot of interesting people and it's something that
You will have a family someday, and you'll be able to tell them about it, right?
Yes, sir.
And show them all these pictures.
Thank you for being here.
Oh, thank you.
It was indeed a multifaceted job providing security and planning in Iraq whenever a VIP visited.
It's a job you don't hear much about, and that's exactly the way it's supposed to be.
They're doing their job then.
We salute and we thank Aggie grad Captain Mark White for his service then, now, and upon his future return to Iraq.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.
In honor of the veterans who have served our country, both past and present, First National Bank, a Franklin family community bank, proudly sponsors Veterans of the Valley.
Since 1862, First National has provided local decision making and accessibility, as well as banking products and services to Brazos Valley citizens.